# rna-seq-blood-mice-toxoplasma-2025
## Author 
Vittoria Mungai 

## Description 
Bulk RNA-sequencing and differential expression analysis of blood samples from mice. The mice are divided in two groups: one is infected with toxoplasma and the other is uninfected control groups. 

## Sample data 
The fastq files from the blood samples used are stored in the directory: `/data/courses/rnaseq_course/toxoplasma_de/reads_Blood/`. It's possible to access the folder directly when needed of create a logical link with the command `ln -s [name_link] [name_original_file]`



### Structure of the workflow 
Starting from the fastq files of the samples the workflow is divided in 6 main steps: 
1. 
2. Quality checks
3. Map reads to the reference genome
4. Count the number of reads per gene
5. Exploratory data analysis
6. Differential expression analysis
7. Overrepresentation analysis

:note: 
- In scripts where parameters are requested there is the command with all the arguments for each execution
- If a scripts access a file which needs to be generated, a explicit comment in the script will tell you. 
- The output of the script are all in the folder results. ALthough, further details are given below. 

#### 1. Accessing the raw data from the cluster 
The fastq files for the Blood sample are stored in the directory `/data/courses/rnaseq_course/toxoplasma_de/reads_Blood/`. 

Below is given the workflow, the order to run the script is: 

#### 2. Quality checks 

For the quality check the listed scripts (in the `/scripts` directory) were run in the following order:
1. Check the quality of the raw reads with fastqc 
    in the folder `/shared`:
    - `generate_sampleslist.sh` to generate the file `results/fastqc/intermediate_results/sampleslist.tsv` with the list of all the samples and the corrispective fastq files. 
    - `run_fastqc_with_slum_array.sh` to generate the fastqc files for each fragment. 
2. Check the quality of the raw reads with multiqc 
    in the folder `/multiqc`: 
    - `run_multiqc.sh` to generate the multiqc report and have a overview of all the fragments in one single report. 
3. Trimming the raw reads to have a better quality and remove the adapters 
    in the folder `/fastp_trimming`: 
    - `trim_adapters_fastp.sh` to trim the fastq files. This script uses the file `results/fastqc/intermediate_results/sampleslist.tsv` generated by the script `/scripts/fastqc/generate_sampleslist.sh` in the previous steps. 
    in the folder `shared`: 
    - `generate_sampleslist.sh` with the arguments specified in the script to generate the list of trimmed files used to run fastqc with the trimmed reads. It will generate the file `results/fastqc_after_trimming/intermediate_results/sampleslist.tsv`
4. Check the quality of the trimmed reads with fastqc 
    in the folder `/fastqc`: 
    - `run_fastqc_with_slum_array.sh` to generate the fastqc files for each trimmed sample 
5. Check the quality of the trimmed reads with multiqc 
    in the folder `/multiqc`: 
    - `run_multiqc.sh` to generate the multiqc report and have a overview of all the fragments in one single report. 
 
#### 3. Map reads to the reference genome
1.  Produce all required index files for Hisat2
    in the folder `hisat2`: 
    - `run_hisat2_index_files.sh`
2. For each sample separately, map the reads to the reference genome using Hisat2. The correct strandedness setting for this library prep protocol is RF.
3. Convert the resulting sam files to bam format using Samtools 
4. Sort the bam files by genomic coordinates using Samtools
    - `map_reads_summary_convert_sort_bam.sh` the steps 2, 3, and 4 are achieved with this script. The output will be only the sorted bam file. 
5. Index the coordinate sorted bam files using Samtools 
    in the folder `shared`: 
    - `generate_sorted_bam_list.sh` to generate le list of the sorted bam files that will be used to use the slurm array in the script: `index_sorted_bam_files.sh`
    in the folder `hisat2`: 
    - `index_sorted_bam_files.sh` it uses the file "sorted_bam_list.tsv" to index the bam files 
6. Check the quality of the mapping through multiqc
    in the folder `hisat2`: 
    - `multiqc_hisat2.sh`to generate a .html report of the quality of the mapping 

#### 4. Count the number of reads per gene
1. Count the number of reads per gene usign featureCounts
    With `featureCounts` a table of counts is generated containing the number of reads per gene in each sample. 
    in folder `feature_counts`: 
    - `feature_counts.sh` will generate the table of counts and the counting summary. 
2. Analyse the output of featureCounts with multiqc 
    - `multiqc_feature_counts.sh` will generate a .html report of featureCounts. 


To generate a final report of the previous step run: 
    in folder `multiqc`
    - `run_multiqc_final_report.sh` you have to pass all the directories 


#### 5. Exploratory data analysis
1. To remove the first line and the columns containing Chr, Start, End, Strand and Length
    in folder `feature_counts`: 
    - `format_feature_counts_file.sh` to reformat the table in `feature_count.txt` to correspond to the format expected by DESeq2.


